updated version of the C++ Getting Started with a Roll The Dice (#3423)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/instrumentation/cpp/getting-started-new.md

Reviewer: Let's just go ahead and rename this file: drop the `-new` suffix. That's also make it easier for us to see the diffs.

Author: Sure.  How's `Starter Project` for the file name?

Reviewer 2: In this case, please just change the contents of `getting-started.md` with your changes.

---
title: Getting Started
description: Get telemetry for your app in less than 5 minutes!
cSpell:ignore: rolldice
weight: 10
---

This page will show you how to get started with OpenTelemetry in C++.

You will learn how you can instrument a simple C++ application automatically, in
such a way that [traces](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/), [metrics](/docs/concepts/signals/metrics/) and [logs](/docs/concepts/signals/logs/) are emitted to the console.

## Prerequisites 

Ensure that you have the following installed locally:

- Git

> - C++ compiler supporting C++ version >= 11

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- C++ compiler supporting C++ version >= 14
```

- Make 
- CMake version >= 3.1

> - [Conan](https://conan.io/)

Reviewer 3: @open-telemetry/cpp-approvers would you be OK with this getting started guide, making use of Conan? I remember that this was not something we (otel community) provide as a first class supported thing?

Reviewer 4: cc @open-telemetry/cpp-approvers 

Some external packages are listed here:

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-cpp/blob/main/INSTALL.md#using-package-managers

opentelemetry-cpp does not maintain packages in these package managers.

Taking conan for example, it is out of date at time of writing:

* The latest conan package is 1.9.1, depends on curl libraries which have a CVE, contains code that is now removed (jaeger exporter, thrift), still uses C++11 which has been removed.
* The latest opentelemetry-cpp version is 1.12.0

For a C++ Getting Started doc, I think it is best to use CMake with only the opentelemetry-cpp code itself, and stay away from third parties (from the otel point of view) package managers.

Reviewer 4: Also, only C++ >= 14 is supported now.

Reviewer 3: @Akhaled19 would it be possible to not use conan through out the documentation? This would mean end-users need to clone the oatpp and opentelemetry repos and then build things from source code themselves.

The Currency Service of the Demo may be a template for you as well, take a look here:

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-demo/tree/main/src/currencyservice

## Example Application 

> The following example uses a basic [Oat++](https://oatpp.io/) application. If you are not using 
> Oat++, that's OK - you can use OpenTelemetry C++ with other web frameworks 
> as well, such as Crow and POCO. For a complete list of 
> libraries for supported frameworks, see the [registry](/ecosystem/registry/?language=cpp).  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example uses a basic [Oat++](https://oatpp.io/) application. If you are not using 
Oat++, that's OK - you can use OpenTelemetry C++ with you can use OpenTelemetry C++ with any C++ application
```

For C++ the link to the registry will not lead the reader to something meaningful, let's keep it simple here (copied from Swift)

#include <string>

using namespace std;

class Handler : public oatpp::web::server::HttpRequestHandler {
public:
  shared_ptr<OutgoingResponse> handle(const shared_ptr<IncomingRequest>& request) override {
    int low = 1;
    int high = 7;
    srand((int)time(0));
    int random = rand() % (high - low) + low;
    // Convert a std::string to oatpp::String
    const string response = to_string(random); 
    return ResponseFactory::createResponse(Status::CODE_200, response.c_str());
  }
};

void run() {
  auto router = oatpp::web::server::HttpRouter::createShared();
  router->route("GET", "/rolldice", std::make_shared<Handler>());
  auto connectionHandler = oatpp::web::server::HttpConnectionHandler::createShared(router);
  auto connectionProvider = oatpp::network::tcp::server::ConnectionProvider::createShared({"localhost", 8000, oatpp::network::Address::IP_4});
  oatpp::network::Server server(connectionProvider, connectionHandler);
  OATPP_LOGI("MyApp", "Server running on port %s", connectionProvider->getProperty("port").getData());
  server.run();
}

int main() {
  oatpp::base::Environment::init();
  run();
  oatpp::base::Environment::destroy();
  return 0;
}

```

> Create another file called `CMakeLists.txt` and it is used to define the build process for 
> your C++ project, inclduing how to compile and link your oatpp and OpenTelemetry 
> application. Here is what `CMakeLists.txt` might look like:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Create another file called `CMakeLists.txt` and it is used to define the build process for 
your C++ project, inclduing how to compile and link your oatpp
application. Here is what `CMakeLists.txt` might look like:
```

In this step we are not adding OpenTelemetry yet, it should just make sure that the app can be run as-is

> ```plaintext

Reviewer 3: ~~~suggestion
```cmake
~~~

cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.1)
set(project_name my-oatpp-project)

# Set C++ standard (e.g., C++17)
set(CMAKE_CXX_STANDARD 17)

# Find Conan-generated build information
include(${CMAKE_BINARY_DIR}/conanbuildinfo.cmake)
conan_basic_setup(TARGETS)  # Use TARGETS to link Conan libraries

# Define your project's source files
set(SOURCES
    main.cpp  # Add your source files here
)

# Create an executable target
add_executable(myapp ${SOURCES})

# Link Conan libraries (oatpp and its dependencies)
target_link_libraries(myapp PRIVATE CONAN_PKG::oatpp)

```

Build and run the application with the following CMake commands, then open
<http://localhost:8080/rolldice> in your browser to ensure it is working.

```bash
mkdir build
cd build 
cmake ..
cmake --build .
```

After successfully building your project, you can run the generated executable:

```bash
./myapp
```

## Instrumentation 

> To begin, install and build `openTelemetry-cpp` library locally using CMake.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To begin, install and build [OpenTelemetry C++](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-cpp) locally using CMake.
```

Naviagte outside of your `cpp-simple` directory and run the following commands:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-cpp
cd opentelemetry-cpp
mkdir build && cd build
cmake ..
make
make install
```

To add OpenTelemetry to your application, update the `CMakeLists.txt` file with the
following additional dependencies: 

```plaintext
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.1)
set(project_name my-oatpp-project)

# Set C++ standard (e.g., C++17)

> set(CMAKE_CXX_STANDARD 14)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
set(CMAKE_CXX_STANDARD 17)
```

---
title: Getting Started
description: Get telemetry for your app in less than 5 minutes!

> cSpell:ignore: rolldice

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
cSpell:ignore: oatpp rolldice
```

weight: 10
---

This page will show you how to get started with OpenTelemetry in C++.

You will learn how to instrument a simple C++ application automatically,
such that [traces](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/), [metrics](/docs/concepts/signals/metrics/) and [logs](/docs/concepts/signals/logs/) are emitted to the terminal.

## Prerequisites 

Ensure that you have the following installed locally:

- Git
- C++ compiler supporting C++ version >= 14
- Make 
- CMake version >= 3.1

## Example Application 

The following example uses a basic [Oat++](https://oatpp.io/) application. If you are 

> not using Oat++, that's OK - you can use OpenTelemetry C++ with any other web frameworks as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not using Oat++, that's OK - you can use OpenTelemetry C++ with any other web framework as well.
```

## Dependencies 

**To begin, we will install Oatpp locally using the [source code](https://github.com/oatpp) and `make`, following these general steps:**

1. Download oatpp source code:

> Obtain the oatpp source code. You can either download the source code from the oatpp Github repository or clone it using Git.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Obtain the oatpp source code. You can either download the source code from the oatpp GitHub repository or clone it using Git.
```

> Obtain the oatpp source code. You can either download the source code from the oatpp Github repository or clone it using Git.

Reviewer: Indent the content of list entries, like this line (line 33), otherwise the list entry content won't display properly:

> <img width="1040" alt="image" src="https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/assets/4140793/90f9ae0c-dc41-4c2b-84ba-56a1abeb9215">

```bash 
git clone https://github.com/oatpp/oatpp.git
```

2. Navigate to the oatpp directory:

Access the oatpp directory in your terminal.

```bash 
cd oatpp
```

3. Build oatpp:

Build oatpp using the `make` command. This command will trigger the build process specified in the Makefile included in the oatpp source code.

```bash
make

> ```

Reviewer 3: There seems to be something missing, since I get "makefile not found", I guess cmake needs to be run first

4. Install oatpp:

> This command will install the built oatpp library and headers on your system, making it accesible for development in your project. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This command will install the built oatpp library and headers on your system, making it accessible for development in your project. 
```

```bash

> make install

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
sudo make install
```

or configure the installation into a path the end user can edit.

Reviewer: (Let's avoid use of `sudo` if we can. WDYT?)

Reviewer 3: Agreed, I think the best option is to keep everything in the src directories and link to that (this would allow someone following the tutorial just to remove that one folder and have everything removed)

```

**Next, install and build [OpenTelemetry C++](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-cpp) locally using CMake, following these general steps:**

1. Clone the OpenTelemetry C++ repository:

Clone the OpenTelemetry C++ GitHub repository to your local machine.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-cpp.git
```

2. Navigate to the OpenTelemetry C++ SDK directory:

Change your working directory to the OpenTelemetry C++ SDK directory.

```bash
cd openTelemetry-cpp
```

3. Create a build directory:

> It's a good practice to create a seperate directory for the build files to keep your source directory clean.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It's a good practice to create a separate directory for the build files to keep your source directory clean.
```

```bash
mkdir build
cd build 
```

4. Configure and generate the build system:

Run the CMake from the build directory to configure the build.

```bash

> cmake ..

Reviewer 3: This failed for me on MacOS, I needed to run

```bash
cmake -DWITH_ABSEIL=ON ..
```

On which OS did you run? We may need to provide options per OS here (I can help with that)

Author: interesting... it did work for me on MacOS. Yes, a lot of these commands are tailored for MacOS users - should I include for other OSs?

Reviewer 3: We can worry about different OSes later, the PR is complex enough, let's make it fly for _some_ people & OSes and then rapidly following up with fixes.

Author: sounds good. So going back to the configure command ` cmake ..`  it didn't work for you and it might not work for others too. Would you like me to add both  `cmake -DWITH_ABSEIL=ON ..` and `cmake ..` in this pr

Reviewer 3: yeah, let's do it that way! thanks!

```

5. Build the project:

After configuring the build system, execute the build process.

```bash
cmake --build .
```

**Finally, create a new project directory called `roll-dice`.**

## Create and launch an HTTP Server

**Integrate oatpp in your project:**

In your `roll-dice` project, utilize the oatpp library by referencing the oatpp headers and linking them when compiling your project.. 

Create a file called `CMakeLists.txt` to define the oatpp library directories, include paths, and link against oatpp during the compilation process.

Here is what `CMakeLists.txt` might look like:

```cmake
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.1)

# Set C++ standard (e.g., C++17)
set(CMAKE_CXX_STANDARD 17)

set(project_name my-oatpp-project)

# Define your project's source files
set(SOURCES
    main.cpp  # Add your source files here
)

# Create an executable target
add_executable(myapp ${SOURCES})

set(OATPP_ROOT /path/to/oatpp)
set(OATPP_LIB /path/to/oatpp/lib)

#set the path to the directory containing "oatpp" package configuration files 

> include_directories(${OATPP_ROOT}/src)

Reviewer 3: are you sure about the /src? in my case this is not required

Author: You're correct; technically, it would work without /src. However, since the source files we're working with are inside /src, it's best to navigate to that directory.

following additional dependencies: 

```cmake
# Set C++ standard (e.g., C++17)
set(CMAKE_CXX_STANDARD 17)

set(project_name my-oatpp-project)

# Define your project's source files
set(SOURCES
    main.cpp  # Add your source files here
)

# Create an executable target
add_executable(myapp ${SOURCES})

set(OATPP_ROOT /path/to/oatpp)
set(OATPP_LIB /path/to/oatpp/lib)
set(OPENTELEMETRY_ROOT /path/to/opentelemetry-cpp)

#set the path to the directory containing "oatpp" package configuration files 
include_directories(${OATPP_ROOT}/src)
target_link_libraries(myapp PRIVATE ${OATPP_LIB}/liboatpp.a)

#set the path to the directory containing "pentelemetry-cpp" package configuration files 
include_directories(${OPENTELEMETRY_ROOT}/api/include)
include_directories(${OPENTELEMETRY_ROOT}/sdk/include)
include_directories(${OPENTELEMETRY_ROOT}/sdk/src)
include_directories(${OPENTELEMETRY_ROOT}/exporters/ostream/include)
target_link_libraries(myapp PRIVATE ${OPENTELEMETRY_ROOT}/build/sdk/src/trace/libopentelemetry_trace.a
 ${OPENTELEMETRY_ROOT}/build/sdk/src/common/libopentelemetry_common.a
 ${OPENTELEMETRY_ROOT}/build/exporters/ostream/libopentelemetry_exporter_ostream_span.a

>  ${OPENTELEMETRY_ROOT}/build/ext/src/http/client/curl/libopentelemetry_http_client_curl.a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

This is not required and for me it wasn't actually built, so let's skip it.

 ${OPENTELEMETRY_ROOT}/build/sdk/src/resource/libopentelemetry_resources.a)
```

> Replace `/path/to/opentelemetry-cpp` with the actual path leading to the opentelemetry-cpp sdk within your local installation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Replace `/path/to/opentelemetry-cpp` with the actual path leading to the opentelemetry-cpp SDK within your local installation.
```
